The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cocke Lorelles Bote, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Cocke Lorelles Bote

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 24, 2019 [EBook #60158]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COCKE LORELLES BOTE ***




Produced by Chuck Greif, deaurider and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                         COCKE LORELLES BOTE.


                  One Hundred and One Copies Printed,
                      One of which is on Vellum.




                          Cocke Lorelles Bote

                           A SATIRICAL POEM

           _From an unique copy printed by Wynkyn de Worde_

                                 “Come begin;
               And you the judges bear a wary eye.”

                                          _Hamlet._


                               ABERDEEN
                       J. & J. P. EDMOND & SPARK
                             MDCCCLXXXIV.




PREFACE.


The singularly interesting fragment of early English literature known as
Cocke Lorelles Bote, is a satirical poem of four hundred and fourteen
lines, in which various classes of society, chiefly of the lower order,
are passed under review in rapid succession. The glimpse we obtain of
each class is only momentary, but the author with some well chosen
phrase, in that short time sketches their failings.

The original from which this poem is reprinted, is in black-letter, and
is preserved in the Garrick Collection, British Museum. It is
considered unique, but unfortunately it is imperfect at the beginning.

It was printed in London, by Wynkyn de Worde, and bears no date, but may
safely be ascribed to the early part of the reign of Henry the Eighth.
The idea of the “Bote,” in which so many different characters are
gathered together, is supposed to have been taken from Sebastian
Brandt’s “Shyp of Folys,” which was translated into English by Alexander
Barclay, and printed by Pynson at the beginning of the sixteenth
century. What gives weight to this suggestion, is the fact that the
wood-cuts with which the original of Cocke Lorell is illustrated, are
similar to those used in the “Ship of Folys.”

The hero of the poem was the leader of a notorious band of robbers which
infested the metropolis, and was probably alive at the time of its
publication. He is mentioned by Samuel Rowlands in “Martin Mark-all,
Beadle of Bridewell, his Defence and Answere to the Belman of London,”
printed in 1610, who describes him in these terms:--“After him,
succeeded by general councell, one Cocke Lorrell, the most notorious
knave that ever lived: by trade he was a tinker, often carrying a panne
and a hammer for show: but when he came to a good booty, he would cast
his profession in a ditch, and play the padder,[1] and then would away,
and as hee past through the toune, crie, ‘Ha you any worke for a
tinker?’ To write of his knaveries it would aske a long time: I referre
you to the old manuscript remayning on record in Maunder’s Hall.[2]
This was he that reduced and brought in forme the Catalogue of
Vagabonds, or Quarterne of Knaves, called the five and twentie Orders of
Knaves: but because it is extant, and in every mans shop, I passe them
over.... This Cocke Lorrell continued among them longer than any of his
predecessors before him, or after him, for he ruled almost two and
twentie yeares, until the yeare An. Dom. 1533, and about the five and
twenty yeare of K. Henry the Eight.”

The “Catalogue of Vagabonds” to which Rowlands alludes in the above
extract as having been written by Cocke Lorell, is a tract printed by
John Awdely in 1565, and of which a second edition was issued by the
same printer in 1575. It is not improbable that Awdely may have himself
been the compiler of the “Catalogue.” A copy of the edition of 1575 is
in the Bodleian Library, the quaint title of which is as follows:--“The
Fraternitye of Vacabondes. As wel of ruflyng Vacabondes, as of beggerly,
of Women as of Men, of Gyrles as of Boyes, with their proper names and
qualities. With a description of the crafty company of Cousoners and
Shifters. Whereunto also is adioyned the XXV Orders of Knaues, otherwyse
called a Quartern of Knaues Confirmed for euer by Cocke Lorell.


       _The Vprightman speaketh._

    Our Brotherhood of Vacabondes,
      If you would know where dwell;
    In graues end Barge which seldome standes,
      The talke wyll shew ryght well.


      _Cocke Lorell aunswereth._

    Some orders of my Knaues also
      In that Barge shall ye fynde;
    For no where shall ye walke I trow,
      But ye shall see their kynde.

Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwellynge in little Britayne Streete
withoute Aldersgate, 1575.”

Dr. Bliss describes the above mentioned tract at length, in the “British
Bibliographer,” Vol. II., p. 12, and makes further allusion to it in his
edition of Earle’s “Microcosmography,” p. 256, published in 1811.

One of the earliest, if not the earliest, printed mention of the Bote
occurs in Thomas Feylde’s “A contrauersye bytwene a louer and a Jaye.
[Colophon.] Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sygne of the
Sonne by Wynkyn de Worde.” The Lover in the preceding verses
apostrophizes Nature regarding his passion for his mistress, at which
the Jay thus expostulates:--

    “Thoughe nature moue,
     And bydde the loue,
     Yet wysdome wolde proue,
       Or it be hote,
     Whan fortune sowre
     Dothe on the lowre,
     Thou getest an ore
       In cocke lorels bote.”

The next mention of Cocke Lorell is in a black-letter poem, preserved in
the Bodleian Library, without date or printer’s name, entitled “Doctour
Double Ale.”

    “I hold you a grota
     Ye wyll rede by rota,
     That ye wete a cota
     In cocke lorels bota.”

The Rev. Charles H. Hartshorne, in “Ancient Metrical Tales,” reprinted
“Doctour Double Ale,” but rendered the last line _cocke losels bota_.

In pointing out this error, Mr. Collier says, that in John Heywood’s
“Epigrams upon three hundred proverbs,” printed in 1566, mention is made
of Cocke Lorelles Bote, under the heading of


               “A BUSY BODY

    He will have an ore in every man’s barge,
    Even in cocke lorels barge, he berth that charge.”

Later on we find that the rascal is not forgotten, for Ben Jonson in his
masque of the “Gypsies Metamorphosed,” has introduced him as feasting
the Evil One, in a song which continued popular for some considerable
time, and was frequently printed as a broadside, copies of which are in
the Pepysian and Ashmolean Collections.

The first verse is as follows:--

    “Cock Lorrell would need have the devil his guest,
       And bid him once into the Peak to dinner,
     Where never the fiend had such a feast
       Provided him yet at the charge of a sinner.”

In 1807, the Rev. William Beloe, in his “Anecdotes of Literature and
Scarce Works,” Vol. I., p. 393, called attention to the following tract,
but unfortunately he changed the title to “Cocke Lorells Vote,” in place
of “Bote.” That this was a misprint may be inferred from the fact, that
in another place in the same work, he makes reference to a passage in
Bishop Percy’s Reliques, where the correct title is given.

Dibdin, who appears never to have seen the work, but says he was
“indebted to Mr. H. Ellis of the British Museum” for specimens “of this
singular performance” has fallen into the droll blunder of writing “of
the licentious and _predatory character_ of its AUTHOR, ... one Cock
Lorell,” whose “popularity has, I believe, escaped the notice of our
chroniclers.”[3]

The poem was presented to the members of the Roxburghe Club in 1817, by
the Rev. Henry Drury, but the impression was limited to thirty-five
copies, two of which were printed on vellum.

It was again printed at Edinburgh for Stanley and Blake in 1817, from a
transcript made by the Rev. Joseph Stevenson, with an introductory
notice by Mr. James Maidment. This reprint has become almost as rare as
the Roxburghe Club edition, only forty copies having been taken.

The Percy Society, in 1843, issued an edition of the “Bote” to its
members, with a preface by Dr. E. F. Rimbault. The rarity of the two
first mentioned reprints, and the form, apart altogether from the
comparative scarcity of the last, has led to the reprinting once more of
this poem. The writer begs to acknowledge his obligations to both Mr.
Maidment’s and Dr. Rimbault’s editions as supplying the material for the
foregoing notice. While aware that there is little that is new which can
be said about Cocke Lorell, he trusts that this edition may be
favourably received, if for no other reasons than these, that while it
avoids the many inaccuracies of the Edinburgh edition, it omits the
modern punctuation which has been introduced into the Percy Society’s
reprint.

The present impression is limited to one hundred and one copies, one of
which is printed on vellum.

                                                          J. P. EDMOND.




            COCKE LORELLES BOTE.


            *  *  *  *  *  *  *
    She had a desyre ofte to be wedde      B. i. _a._
    And also to lye in an other mannes bedde
    Lytell rought she therfore
    She is as softe as a lamme yf one do her meue
    And lyke to yᵉ deuyll wan a mā dothe her greue
    So well is she sette
    O good condycyon to her housbonde
    Yf he call her calat she calleth hȳ knaue agayne
    She shyll not dye in his dette
    By Saynt Jone sayd Cocke than
    These be fayre vertues in a woman
    Thou shalte be my launder
    To wasshe and kepe clene all my gere
    Our two beddes togyder shall be sette
    Without ony lette
    The nexte that came was a coryar
    And a cobeler his brother
    As ryche as a newe shorne shepe
    They offred Cocke a blechynge pot
    Other Jewelles they had not
    Scant shoes to theyr fete
    The coryer dresseth so well his lether
    That it wolde drynke water in fayre weder
    Therfore he hath many a crystes curse
    And tho cobeler for his cloutynge
    The people blesseth hym with euyll cheuynge
    To knytte faste in his purse
    A shomaker came to these other two
    Bytwene them two was moche a do
    For a pyese of lether
    They togged with theyr teth and gnewe it there      B. i. _b._
    And pulde as it had been grehondes at a hare
    It was a shepes skyne of a wether
    And than they tanned it whan they had done
    To make lether to hym with mennes shone
    And all for theyr auayle
    For as sone as the hemme is tore
    The sho is lost for euer more
    And it is lytell meruayle
    A tanner for euyll tannyng of leder
    They foure with sorowe Cocke dyde set togyder
    And neuer a good without fayle
    Than came one wᵗ two bolddogges at his tayle
    And that was a bocher without fayle
    All be gored in reed blode
    In his hande he bare a flap for flyes
    His hosen gresy vpon his thyes
    That place for magottes was very good
    On his necke he bare a cole tre logge
    He had as moche pyte as a dogge
    And he were ones wrothe
    He loked perysshe and also rowe
    A man wolde take hym for a shrewe I trowe
    And of his company be lothe
    Than came a gonge fermourer
    Other wyse called a masser scourer
    With hym a canyell raker
    Theyr presence made Cocke and his mē to spewe
    For as swete was theyr brethe as henkā or rewe
    To wasshe them they laked water
    On these Irysshe copel I wyll not tare      B. ii. _a._
    Cocke dyde set thē there as knaues sholde be
    Amonge the slouenly sorte
    Than came two false towlers in nexte
    He set them by pykers of the best
    For there sholde they abyde
    But before yᵗ they were plonged in the ryuer
    To searche theyr bodyes fayre and clere
    Therof they had good sporte
    A myller dustypoll than dyde come
    A Ioly felowe with a golden thome
    On his necke a sacke was
    Many sayd that he with reprefe
    Of all craftes was nexte a thefe      B. ii. _b._
    In that Cocke founde no lacke
    He sayd that he touled twys for forgetynge
    And stele floure and put chauke therin
    Be sherewe hym that taught hym that
    Cocke bad hym grynde cherystones and peson
    To make his men brede for a season
    By cause whete was very dere
    Than came a pardoner with his boke
    His quaterage of euery man he toke
    But Cocke wolde theyr names here
    The pardoner sayd I will rede my roll
    And ye shall here the names poll by poll
    There of ye nede not fere
    Here is fyrst Cocke Lorell the knyght
    And symkyn emery mayntenaūce agayne ryght
    With slyngethryfte fleshemonger
    Also fabyane flaterer
    And fesly claterer
    With adam auerus flayle swenger
    And fraūces flaperoche of stewys captayne late
    With gylys vnyeste mayer of newgate
    And lewes vnlusty the lesynge monger
    Here also baude baudyn boller
    And his brother copyn coler
    With mathew marchaunte of shoters hyll
    Crystofer catchepoll a crystes course gaderer
    And wat welbelyne of ludgate Iayler
    With laurence lorell of clerken well
    Here is gylys Iogeler of ayebery
    And hym sougelder of lothe bery      B. iii. _a._
    With wallys the wrangler
    Pers potter of brydge water
    Saunder fely the mustarde maker
    With Ielyan Iangeler
    Here is Ienkyne berwarde of Barwycke
    And tom tombler of warwyke
    With Phyllyp fletcher of fernam
    Here is wyll wyly the myl peker
    And patrycke peuysshe heerbeter
    With lusty hary hange man
    Also mathewe tothe drawer of London
    And sybly sole mylke wyfe of Islyngton
    With davy drawelache of rokyngame
    Here is maryone marchauntes at all gate      B. iii. _b._
    Her husbōde dwelleth at yᵉ sygne of yᵉ cokeldes pate
    Nexte house to Robyn renawaye
    Also hycke crokenec the rope maker
    And steuen mesyll mouthe muskyll taker
    With Iacke basket seler of alwelay
    Here is george of podynge lane carpenter
    And patrycke peuysshe a conynge dyrte dauber
    Worshypfull wardayn of slouens In
    There is maryn peke small fremason
    And pers peuterer that knocketh a basyn
    With gogle eyed tomson shepster of lyn
    Here is glyed wolby of gylforde squyere
    Andrewe of habyngedon apell byer
    With alys esy a gay tale teller
    Also peter paten maker
    With gregory loue good of rayston mayer
    And hary halter seler at tyborn the ayer
    Here is kate with the croked fote
    That is colsys doughter the dronken koke
    A lusty pye baker
    Here is saunder sadeler of froge strete corner
    With Ielyan Ioly at sygne of the bokeler
    And mores moule taker
    Also annys angry with the croked buttocke
    That dwelled at yᵉ sygne of yᵉ dogges hede in yᵉ pot
    By her crafte a breche maker
    Cocke sayd pardoner now ho and sease
    Thou makeste me wery holde thy pease
    A thynge tell thou to me
    What profyte is to take thy pardon      B. iv. _a._
    Shewe vs what mede is to come
    To be in this fraternyte
    Syr this pardon is newe founde
    By syde London brydge in a holy grounde
    Late called the stewes banke
    Ye knowe well all that there was
    Some relygyous women in that place
    To whome men offred many a franke
    And bycause they were so kynde and lyberall
    A merueylous auenture there is be fall
    Yf ye lyst to here how
    There came suche a winde fro wynchester
    That blewe these women ouer the ryuer
    In wherye as I wyll you tell
    Some at saynt Kateryns stroke a grounde
    And many in holborne were founde
    Some at saynt Gyles I trowe
    Also in aue maria aly and at westmenster
    And some in shordyche drewe theder
    With grete lamentacyon
    And by cause they haue lost that fayre place
    They wyll bylde at colman hedge in space
    A nother noble mansyon
    Fayrer and euer the halfe strete was
    For euery house newe paued is with gras
    Shall be full of fayre floures
    The walles shallbe of hauthorne I wote well
    And hanged wᵗ whyte motly yᵗ swete doth smell
    Grene shall be the coloures
    And as for this olde place these wenches holy      B. iv. _b._
    They wyll not haue it called the stewys for foly
    But maketh it a strabery banke
    And there is yet a chapell saue
    Of whiche ye all the pardon haue
    The saynt is of symme trollanke
    I wyll reherse here in generall
    The indulgences that ye haue shall
    Is these that foloweth with more
    At the oure of deth whan ye haue nede
    Ye shall be assoyled of euery good dede
    That you haue done before
    And ye shall be parte taker of as many good dedde
    As is done euery nyght a bedde
    And also ferthermore
    At euery tauerne in the yere
    A solempne dyryge is songe there
    With a grete drynkynge
    At all ale houses trewely
    Ye shall be prayed for hertely
    With a Ioyefull wepynge
    And the pope darlaye hath graūted in his byll
    That euery brother may do what he wyll
    Whyle that they be wakynge
    And the pardone gyueth you that hath the pose
    On your owne sleue to wype your nose
    Without rebuke takynge
    Also pope nycoll graunteth you all in this texte
    The coughe and the colyke the gout and the flyxe
    With the holsome tothe ache
    Also it is graunted by our bulles of lede      B. v. _a._
    That whan ony brother is dede
    To the chyrche dogges shall cary hym
    A ryche pal to ly on yᵉ corse late fro rome is come
    Made of an olde payre of blewe medly popley hosone
    For yᵉ worshyppe of all yᵉ brethrene
    Theyr knylles shall be rōge in yᵉ myddes of tēse hosone      B. v. _b._
    And theyr masse songe at shoters hill amonge the elmes
    With grete deuocyon in dede
    And many thynges elles shall be done
    The resydewe I wyll reherse soone
    For drynke fyrst must I nede
    Than Cocke cast a syde his hede
    And sawe the stretes all ouer sprede
    That to his bote wolde come
    Of all craftes there were one or other
    I wyll shewe how many or I passe ferther
    And reken them one by one
    The fyrst was golde smythes and grote clyppers
    Multyplyers and clothe thyckers
    Called fullers euerychone
    There is taylers tauerners and drapers
    Potycaryes ale brewers and bakers
    Mercers fletchers and sporyers
    Boke prynters peynters bowers
    Myllers carters and botyll makers
    Waxechaundelers clothers and grocers
    Wolle men vynteners and flesshemongers
    Salters Iowelers and habardashers
    Drouers cokes and pulters
    Yermongers pybakers and waferers
    Fruyters chese mongers and mynstrelles
    Talowe chaundelers hostelers and glouers
    Owchers skynners and cutlers
    Blade smythes fosters and sadelers
    Coryers cordwayners and cobelers
    Gyrdelers forborers and webbers      B. vi. _a._
    Quylte makers shermen and armorers
    Borlers tapstry workemakers and dyers
    Brouderers strayners and carpyte makers
    Sponers torners and hatters
    Lyne webbers setters with lyne drapers
    Roke makers coper smythes and lorymers
    Brydel bytters blacke smythes and ferrars
    Bokell smythes horse leches and gold beters
    Fyners plommers and penters
    Bedmakers fedbed makers and wyre drawers
    Founders laten workers and broche makers
    Pauyers bell makers and brasyers
    Pynners nedelers and glasyers
    Bokeler makers dyers and lether sellers
    Whyte tanners galyors and shethers
    Masones male makers and merbelers
    Tylers brycke leyers harde hewers
    Parys plasterers daubers and lyme borners
    Carpenters coupers and ioyners
    Pype makers wode mōgers and orgyn makers
    Coferers carde makers and caruers
    Shyppe wryghtes whele wryghtes and sowers
    Harpe makers leches and vpholsterers
    Porters fesycyens and corsers
    Parchemente makers skynners and plowers
    Barbers boke bynders and lymners
    Repers faners and horners
    Pouche makers belowfarmes and cage sellers
    Lanterners stryngers grynders
    Arowe heders maltemen and corne mongers      B. vi. _b._
    Balancers tynne casters and skryueners
    Stacyoners vestyment swoers and ymagers
    Sylke women pursers and garnysshers
    Table makers sylke dyers and shepsters
    Golde sheres keuerchef launds and rebē makers
    Tankarde berers bouge men and spere planers
    Spynsters carders and cappe knytters
    Sargeauntes katche pollys and somners
    Carryers carters and horskepers
    Courte holders bayles and honters
    Constables hede borowes and katers
    Butlers sterchers and musterde makers
    Harde waremen mole sekers and ratte takers
    Bewardes brycke borners and canel rakers
    Potters brome sellers pedelers
    Shepherdes cowe herdes and swyne kepers
    Broche makers glas blowers cādelstycke casts
    Hedgers dykers and mowers
    Gonners maryners and shypmaysters
    Chymney swepers and costerde mongers
    Lode men and bere brewers
    Fysshers of the see and muskel takers
    Schouyll chepers gardeners and rake fetters
    Players purse cutters money baterers
    Gold washers tomblers Iogelers
    Pardoners kȳges bēche gatherers and lether dyers
    There were theues hores and baudes wᵗ mortherers
    Crakers facers and chylderne quellers
    Spyes lyers and grete sclaunderers
    Cursers chyders and grete vengeaunce cryers      C. i. _a._
    Dyssymulynge beggers hede brekers borders
    Nette makers and harlote takers
    Swerers and outragyous laughers
    Surmowsers yll thynkers and make brasers
    With lollers lordaynes and fagot berers
    Luskes slouens and kechen knaues
    Bargemen whery rowers and dysers
    Tyburne collopes and peny pryckers
    Bowlers mas shoters and quayters
    Flaterers and two face berers
    Sluttes drabbes and counseyll whystelers
    With smoggy colyers and stȳkȳge gōge fermers
    Of euery craft some there was
    Shorte or longe more or lasse
    All these rehersed here before
    In Cockes bote eche man had an ore
    All tho that offyces had
    Some woūde at yᵉ capstayne as Cocke thē bad
    Some stode at yᵉ slȳge some dyde trusse and thrȳge
    Some pulde at the beryll some sprede yᵉ mayne myssyll
    Some howysed the mayne sayle
    Some veryed showte a very slayle
    Some roped yᵉ hoke some yᵉ pōpe and some yᵉ laūce
    Some yᵉ lōge bote dyde laūce some mēde yᵉ corse
    Mayne corfe toke in a refe by force
    And they that were abyll drewe at the cabyll
    Some the anker layde some at the plōpe a sayll swepe
    One kepte yᵉ compas and watched yᵉ our glasse
    Some yᵉ lodysshestōe dyd seke some yᵉ bote dyd
    Some made knottes of lynkes endes      C. i. _b._
    Some the stay rope suerly byndes
    Some a satte borte a stare borde
    Some the standerdes oute dyde brynge
    Some one the shrowedes dyde clyme
    Some couched a hogges heed vnder a hatche
    Some threwe out bayte fysshe to catche
    Some pulled vp the bonauenture
    Some to howes the tope sayle dyde entre
    Some stered at the helme behynde
    Some whysteled after the wynde
    There was non that there was
    But he had an offyce more or lasse
    Than Cocke Lorell dyde his whystele blowe
    That all his men sholde hym knowe
    With that they cryed and made a shoute
    That the water shoke all aboute
    Than men myght here the ores classhe
    And on the water gaue many a dasshe
    They sprede theyr sayles as voyde of sorowe
    Forthe they rowed Saint George to borowe
    For Ioy their trūpettes dyde they blowe
    And some songe heue and howe rombelowe
    They sayled fro garlyke hede to knaues in
    And a pele of gonnes gan they rynge
    Of colman hedge a sight they had
    That made his company very glad
    For there they thought all to play
    Bytwene tyborne and chelsay
    With this man was a lusty company
    For all raskyllers fro them they dyde trye      C. ii. _a._
    They banysshed prayer peas and sadnes
    And toke with them myrthe sporte and gladnes
    They wolde not haue vertu ne yet deuocyon
    But ryotte and reuell with ioly rebellyon      C. ii. _b._
    They songe and daunsed full merely
    With swerynge and starynge heuen hye
    Some said yᵗ they were gētle mē of grete myght
    That ther purses were so lyght
    And some wente in fured gownes and gay shone
    That had no mo faces than had the mone
    Of this daye gladde was many a brothell
    That myght haue an ore with Cocke Lorell
    Thus they daunsed with all theyr myght
    Tyll that phebus had lost his lyght
    But than came lucyna with all her pale hewe
    To take her sporte amonge the cloudes blewe
    And marcury he trewe downe his goldē bemes
    And sperus her syluer stremes
    That in the worlde gaue so grete lyght
    As all the erth had be paued with whyte
    Thā Cocke wayed anker and housed his sayle
    And forthe he rowed without fayle
    They sayled England thorowe and thorowe
    Vyllage towne cyte and borowe
    They blessyd theyr shyppe whan they had done
    And dranke about saynt Iulyans torne
    Than euery man pulled at his ore
    With that I coulde se them no more
    But as they rowed vp the hyll
    The bote swayne blewe his whystell full shryll
    And I wente homwarde to mowe shame stere
    With a company dyde I mete
    As ermytes monkes and freres
    Chanons chartores and inholders      C. iij. _a._
    And many whyte nonnes with whyte vayles
    That was full wanton of theyr tayles
    To meet with Cocke they asked how to do      C. iij. _b._
    And I tolde them he was a go
    Than were they sad euerychone
    And went agayne to theyr home
    But my counseyll I gaue them there
    To mete with Cocke another yere
    No more of Cocke now I wryte
    But mery it is whan knaues done mete
    Cocke had in his hande a grete route
    The thyrde persone of Englande
    Thus of Cocke Lorell I make an ende
    And to heuen god your soules sende
    That redeth this boke ouer all
    Chryst couer you with his mantell perpetuall.

                AMEN.

Here endeth Cocke Lorelles bote. Imprynted at London in the Flete strete
at the sygne of the sonne by Wynkyn de Worde.

              Reprinted at ABERDEEN by MILNE & HUTCHISON.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Padder, or Rumpadder, a thief.--SLANG DICTIONARY.

[2] Maunder, a beggar.--SLANG DICTIONARY.

[3] Dibdin’s Ames, Vol. II., p. 352.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cocke Lorelles Bote, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COCKE LORELLES BOTE ***

***** This file should be named 60158-0.txt or 60158-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/1/5/60158/

Produced by Chuck Greif, deaurider and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
